[OCPCLOUD-1248] Add initial iteration of ControlPlaneMachineSet operator enhancement (#1008)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/machine-api/control-plane-set.md

---
title: control-plane-set-controller
authors:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2022-01-11
last-updated: 2022-01-17
tracking-lin:
  - TBD
replaces:
  - "[/enhancements/machine-api/control-plane-machinesets.md](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/machine-api/control-plane-machinesets.md)"
  - "https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/278"
  - "https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/292"
---

# Control Plane Set Controller

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

To enable automated management of vertical scaling and replacement of Control Plane Machines, this proposal introduces
a new resource and controller that will manage Control Plane Machine instances.

## Motivation

> As OpenShift adoption increases and our managed services offerings become more popular, the manual effort required to

Reviewer: may be mention/provide some context here on how a hypershift topology will solve this problem for multicluster scenarios and mention scenarios where this is still useful because a non hosted control plane is needed. e.g first management cluster.

scale Control Plane Machines as clusters grow or shrink is becoming a significant drain on the OpenShift Dedicated team.

The procedure to resize a Control Plane today is lengthy and very involved. It takes a significant amount of time for
an OpenShift expert to perform. We also document this process for our end users, however due to the complexity of the
procedure, there is discomfort in recommending this procedure to end users who may not be as familiar with the product.

To ensure the long term usability of OpenShift, we must provide an automated way for users to scale their Control Plane
as and when their cluster needs additional capacity.

### Goals

* Provide a "best practices" approach to declarative management of Control Plane Machines

> * Allow users to "1-click" scale their Control Plane to large or smaller instances

Author: As I understood it from initial requirements gather calls, yes. We need to scale up the control plane to bigger instances when the capacity is being stretched and be able to scale down to smaller instances when it is being under-utilized.

Having any kind of code check that the user is scaling down the instance type sounds like it will be very complex, we will have to start interpreting VM types which is not something we've done before

@jeremyeder Could you weigh in here

mechanisms akin to those seen in a StatefulSets and Deployments to allow rollouts of updated configuration to the
Control Plane Machines.

### User Stories

- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to safely and automatically vertically resize my
  control plane as and when the demand on the control plane changes
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to automatically recover failed Control Plane
  Machines
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to make changes to the configuration of the
  underlying hardware of my control plane and have these changes safely applied using immutable hardware concepts
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to control rollout of changes to my Control Plane
  Machines such that I can test changes with a single replica before applying the change to all replicas
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift with restricted hardware capacity, I would like to be able to scale down my
  control plane before adding new Control Plane Machines with newer configuration, notably, my environment does not

>   have capacity to add additional Machines during updates

Author: I'll give this a reword, thanks for the suggestion

### API Extensions

We will introduce a new `ControlPlaneSet` CRD to the `machine.openshift.io/v1beta1` API group. It will be based on the
spec and status structures defined below.

```go
type ControlPlaneSetSpec struct {
    // Replicas defines how many Control Plane Machines should be
    // created by this ControlPlaneSet.
    // This field is immutable and cannot be changed after cluster
    // installation.
    // The ControlPlaneSet only operates with 3 or 5 node control planes,
    // 3 and 5 are the only valid values for this field.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum:=3;5
    // +kubebuilder:default:=3
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

    // Strategy defines how the ControlPlaneSet will update
    // Machines when it detects a change to the ProviderSpec.
    // +optional
    Strategy ControlPlaneSetStrategy `json:"strategy,omitempty"`

    // FailureDomains is the list of failure domains or
    // availability zones in which the ControlPlaneSet should
    // balance the Control Plane Machines.

>     // This will beinjected into the ProviderSpec in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // This will be injected into the ProviderSpec in the
```

}

type ControlPlaneSetTemplate struct {
    // ObjectMeta is the standard object metadata
    // More info: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#metadata
    // Labels are required to match the ControlPlaneSet selector.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    ObjectMeta metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata"`

    // ProviderSpec contains the platform specific details
    // for creating the Control Plane Machines.
    // It should be complete apart from the platform specific
    // failure domain field. This will be overriden when the
    // Machines are created based on the FailureDomains field.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    ProviderSpec *runtime.RawExtension `json:"providerSpec"`
}

type ControlPlaneSetStrategy struct {
    // Type defines the type of update strategy that should be
    // used when updating Machines owned by the ControlPlaneSet.
    // Valid values are "RollingUpdate", "Recreate" and "OnDelete".
    // The current default value is "RollingUpdate".
    // +kubebuilder:default:="RollingUpdate"
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum:="RollingUpdate";"Recreate";"OnDelete"
    // +optional

>     Type ControlPlaneSetStrategyType `json:"type,omitempty"`

Reviewer: From a UX pov I see two upgrade types that cover needs in existing scenarios - replace and in-place. Now, you can define different strategies to dictate the upgrade workflow in each scenario depending on how much control you need e.g rolling, ondelete...
These are the semantics we expose in hypershift:
UpgradeType (replace/in-place) 1 - n UpgradeStrategy (RollingUpdate, OnDelete...)

Author: If I understand this correctly, the suggestion is about the way to modify the hosts? So replace would mean create a new host and in-place would mean updating the host on the infrastructure provider in-place.

Is in-place something that HyperShift is planning to support? I was under the impression that both MAPI and CAPI were not going to do in-place reconfiguration and that they were considered to be immutable infrastructure projects?

Reviewer: We do support in place upgrades in OCP regardless what API is backing a Node, and we do in hypershift via NodePools.

Author: Do you mean from a hardware perspective or from a software perspective? I appreciate that we update the software on our hosts, but I don't think Machine API at least has a way to reconcile the hardware aspects (eg if a user were to change an instance type we can't update that on the fly). Are you suggesting this can be done in HyperShift? If so, I need to learn more about this, perhaps we can sync

Author: Had a sync with Alberto offline to understand what is going on here, this is a software level feature which we do not intend to support initially within CPMS.
The API design does not preclude us from adding this in the future, but the initial requirements dictate hardware replacement, so to limit scope, having a distinction between hardware and software replacements isn't required

    // This is left as a struct to allow future rolling update
    // strategy configuration to be added later.
}

// ControlPlaneSetStrategyType is an enumeration of different update strategies
// for the Control Plane Machines.
type ControlPlaneSetStrategyType string

> const (

Author: The Machine API by design is an immutable infrastructure product, we don't support in-place mutation of machines.

As far as I understood it, the idea of manually stopping and resizing machines is a support exception to allow a quicker replacement until we have full automation in place.

IMO, bringing up new machines, while potentially wasteful, should actually be safer in the long term as we know programatically what we are doing there, with a shut down and update, this gets more confusing if you try to program the changes

    // Control Plane Machines.
    OnDelete ControlPlaneSetStrategyType = "OnDelete"
)

// ControlPlaneSetStatus represents the status of the ControlPlaneSet CRD.
type ControlPlaneSetStatus struct {
    // ObservedGeneration is the most recent generation observed for this
    // ControlPlaneSet. It corresponds to the ControlPlaneSets's generation,
    // which is updated on mutation by the API Server.
    // +optional
    ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`

    // Replicas is the number of Control Plane Machines created by the
    // ControlPlaneSet controller.
    // Note that during update operations this value may differ from the
    // desired replica count.
    Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

    // ReadyReplicas is the number of Control Plane Machines created by the
    // ControlPlaneSet controller which are ready.
    ReadyReplicas int32 `json:"readyReplicas,omitempty"`

    // UpdatedReplicas is the number of non-terminated Control Plane Machines
    // created by the ControlPlaneSet controller that have the desired
    // provider spec.
    UpdatedReplicas int32 `json:"updatedReplicas,omitempty"`

> }

Reviewer: We'd probably want conditions to signal in progress scaling

Author: Yep fair point, I had intended to add them, one of my todos is to compare this API to the ControlPlane requirements from Cluster API to see if there's any guidelines there, with a view that this project may form a future implementation for IPI clusters

I had omitted them up to now because I don't know what types of conditions or reasons we might have to put on here, I'll add it in with a TODO for that.

instances.
Once the membership has been switched, the Machine deletion hook will be removed on the old Machine, allowing it to be
removed by the Machine controller in the normal way.

#### Removing/disabling the ControlPlaneSet

As some users may want to remove or disable the ControlPlaneSet, and we have no bulletproof way to prevent a user
deleting the ControlPlaneSet, a finalizer will be placed on the ControlPlaneSet to allow the controller to ensure a
safe removal of the ControlPlaneSet, while leaving the Control Plane Machines in place.

Notably it will need to ensure that there are no owner references on the Machines pointing to the ControlPlaneSet
instances. This will prevent the garbage collector from removing the Control Plane Machines when the ControlPlaneSet is
deleted.

If users later wish to reinstall the ControlPlaneSet, they are free to do so.

#### Installing a ControlPlaneSet within an existing cluster

When adding a ControlPlaneSet to a new cluster, the end user will need to define the ControlPlaneSet resource by
copying the existing Control Plane Machine ProviderSpecs.

> Once this is copied, they should remove the failure domain and add the desired failure domains to the `FailureDomains`

Author: > Is there a possibility adoption could be part of the ControlPlaneSet creation, triggered by some specific condition such as an annotation?

Could you expand on your concern here, I'm not sure exactly what you're saying. The idea is that the adoption process happens when the CPS is created, so I would expect SRE to apply a new CPS to each individual cluster (possibly in batches) if they want to take advantage of the CPS on older clusters. My recommendation though is that we focus on new clusters where this functionality will be included from the start

> Having this as a part of the CPS operator would allow the deletion and recreation of the CR (previous section) to be nearly trivial from an administrator perspective.

So your suggestion is that if you create an empty CPS, the ControlPlaneSet operator should populate the spec for you? This feels like an anti-pattern for Kube and the idea of declarative APIs. I'm hesitant about us suggesting this as there's no guarantee that the existing configs are accurate, eg if the machines were on a UPI cluster (they should have been removed but maybe there were), at that point, we have introduced a spec that is invalid. If we infer it and get it wrong, that's on us, if a user specs it and gets it wrong, that's on them 🤔 

We should also bear in mind the scope of this project, adding adoption into the mix and having to deal with the safety aspects of that will significantly expand the scope and extend the development time which is likely to already be tight if we want to get something running for this within 4.11

> Once this is copied, they should remove the failure domain and add the desired failure domains to the `FailureDomains`

Reviewer 3: Manually managing these for the managed OCP fleet isn't an option.  But understood the concern with automatically creating the spec for CPS.  For my use case though it's IPI 100% of the time.  I am also not suggesting we populate CPS all the time, would it be a more tenable solution if it were an opt-in?

> Once this is copied, they should remove the failure domain and add the desired failure domains to the `FailureDomains`

Author: I was expecting that the managed fleet would come up with some automation for creating the CPS, I don't think this warrants being in the core of the product though and I'm concerned about the scope creep.

We could possible have an opt-in adoption mechanism, but if we were to do that, that would have to be a stretch goal and not part of the MVP IMO, I wouldn't want to jeopardise the main project for this. I'm also not sure I'd want to expose this to all users which makes me think again, this should be something separate, what is your hesitation about running some job on the cluster to create the CPS?

> Once this is copied, they should remove the failure domain and add the desired failure domains to the `FailureDomains`

Reviewer 3: I can't speak for the use case across all OCP customers but it seems like a useful pattern to adopt via code in the operator instead of documentation and steps executed by a customer.  There are a lot of clusters out in the wild, I presume management of masters is a useful capability.  I know from the managed OCP perspective it's been a gap that is getting more attention lately.

So I'm not necessarily reluctant to run a job to create CPS resources, though the mechanics on how we can roll that out will make it painful.  I'm asking if that's the right way to do it for OCP and our customers.

> Once this is copied, they should remove the failure domain and add the desired failure domains to the `FailureDomains`

Author: > for example, the user could issue an oc command, and it would return a manifest they could save and then inspect before applying. that might provide a nice middle ground where it could be automated but doesn't need to be.

We talked about this during the cluster lifecycle arch call last week. There were others with concerns about having this as an automated thing in-cluster. We automate it and break the cluster, that's on us, the customer breaks it, that's on them. 

There was some support for a CLI kind of thing/script that would spit out a CPS manifest for the customer to apply if they wanted, with the caveat that they should verify it before they apply it. Though my initial stance on this was that this should be a stretch goal, certainly for the purpose of this enhancement and feature we have been focusing on the experience for new clusters, older clusters can adopt later IMO

wait for these to join the cluster. Once the new Machines have joined, they will replace the deleted Machines as normal
with the process outlined earlier in this document.

#### Machine Config may change during a rollout

There may be occasions where the Machine Config Operator attempts to rollout new Machine Config during a Control Plane
scaling operation. We do not believe this will cause issue, but it may extend the time taken for the scaling operation
to take place.

While a scaling operation is in progress, etcd quorum is protected by the protection mechanism mentioned above as well
as the etcd quorum guard. The quorum guard will ensure that at most one etcd instance is interrupted at any time.
If the Machine Config operator needs to rollout an update, it will proceed in the usual manner while the etcd learner
process (part of scaling up a new etcd member) may suffer a delay due to the restart of the Control Plane Machines.

#### A user deletes the ControlPlaneSet resource

Users will be allowed to remove ControlPlaneSet resources should they so desire. This shouldn't pose a risk to the

> control plane as the ControlPlaneSet will orphan Machines it manages before it is removed from the cluster. More detail

Author: > guess the machines get deleted due to owner references when CPS is deleted?

Yep, the machines will be deleted, but they should also be protected from removal by the etcd operator's machine deletion hooks, so you'll have deleted machines, sat for a while doing nothing, an alert will fire, and the only way to then resolve would be to re-add a CPS and have it replace the machines, then remove the CPS properly.

Users should not interfere with finalizers, especially in sensitive applications like this one

is available in the [Removing/disabling the ControlPlaneSet](#Removingdisabling-the-ControlPlane) notes.

> #### The ControlPlaneSet spec may not match the existing Machines

Author: I don't feel that really adds much for us though, as the only safe way for the operator to do an adoption like this is when the masters are all consistent, in which case, there's no risk anyway

#### Support Procedures

TBD

## Implementation History

There is not current implementation of this enhancement, however, it will depend on the
[etcd quorum protection mechanism](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/943) which is currently being
implemented.

## Drawbacks

- Introduction of new CRDs complicates the user experience
  - Users will have to learn about the new CRD and how it can be used
  - Counter: The concepts are familiar from existing apps resources and CRDs
- We are making it easier for customers to put their clusters at risk
  - If a scale up fails, this will then need manual intervention, the cluster will become degraded at this point
  - Counter: The etcd protection mechanism should mean that the cluster is never at risk of losing quorum, clusters
    should be recoverable
- We will need confidence in the project before we can ship it
  - We need to decide how to ship the project, will we ship it as GA or TP in the first instance?

## Alternatives

Previous iterations of this enhancement linked in the metadata describe alternative ways we could implement this

> feature.

Reviewer 4: Given our general desire to stop adding new things to the release payload, and the fact that this new feature seems to be opt-in, did you explore delivering this new operator via OLM instead of the payload?

Author: I was imagining that this would eventually be (4.12) default and set up by the installer, so I hadn't investigated the idea of OLM. If we do want to make this opt-in permanently then having it delivered via OLM could be an option.

When I've been talking with the etcd team about this in the past, we had imagined they would also observe the CPS resource to understand control plane scale in the longer term as well as they don't have a good way to see how many replicas they should have at the moment

Author: I'm going to add an open question for is this optional or not

---
title: control-plane-set-controller
authors:
  - "@JoelSpeed"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:

>   - TBD

Reviewer 5: @soltysh @tkashem @hasbro17 and myself please.

continued adoption of HA clusters.

### Goals

* Provide a "best practices" approach to declarative management of Control Plane Machines
* Allow users to "1-click" scale their Control Plane to large or smaller instances
* Allow the adoption of existing Control Planes into this new mechanism
* Provide a safe mechanism to perform the sensitive operation of scaling the Control Plane and provide adequate
  feedback to end users about progress of the operation
* Allow users to opt-out of Control Plane management should our mechanism not fit their needs
* Allow users to customise rolling update strategies based on the needs of their environments

### Non-Goals

* Allow horizontal scaling of the Control Plane (this may be required in the future, but today is considered
  unsupported by OpenShift)
* Management of the Etcd cluster state (the Etcd Operator will handle this separately)
* Automatic adoption of existing clusters (we will provide instructions to allow users to opt-in for existing cluster)
* Management of anything that falls out of the scope of Machine API

## Proposal

> A new CRD `ControlPlaneSet` will be introduced into OpenShift and a respective `control-plane-set-operator` will be

Reviewer 5: <bike-shedding>technically we have one control plane, not a set. So technically ControlPlaneMachineSet is the right term</bike-shedding>

Reviewer 6: I am definitely concerned that a user reading about "machine sets" would see a "control plane machine set" as a subset or type of machine set. If there is a more accurate term that also can't cause accidental conflation of terms, that would be ideal.

Reviewer 7: i agree with @sttts reasoning about this being a `ControlPlaneMachineSet`, but i also agree about the naming confusion with respects to using `MachineSet` in the name.

we chatted about this during our team standup and i'm curious if we could go in a divergent direction by calling this a `ControlPlaneInfrastructureSet`? this would make it clearer about what the resource is defining and also leave us room for expansion in the future as we consider different types of infrastructures and APIs.

i don't have a strong opinion about the name, but i like the idea of making this more clear to users.

- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift, I would like to be able to control rollout of changes to my Control Plane
  Machines such that I can test changes with a single replica before applying the change to all replicas
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift with restricted hardware capacity, I would like to be able to scale down my
  control plane before adding new Control Plane Machines with newer configuration, notably, my environment does not
  have capacity to add additional Machines during updates

### API Extensions

We will introduce a new `ControlPlaneSet` CRD to the `machine.openshift.io/v1beta1` API group. It will be based on the
spec and status structures defined below.

```go
type ControlPlaneSetSpec struct {
    // Replicas defines how many Control Plane Machines should be
    // created by this ControlPlaneSet.
    // This field is immutable and cannot be changed after cluster
    // installation.
    // The ControlPlaneSet only operates with 3 or 5 node control planes,
    // 3 and 5 are the only valid values for this field.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum:=3;5
    // +kubebuilder:default:=3
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     Replicas *int32 `json:"replicas"`

Reviewer 5: why a pointer?

    // Strategy defines how the ControlPlaneSet will update
    // Machines when it detects a change to the ProviderSpec.
    // +optional

>     Strategy ControlPlaneSetStrategy `json:"strategy,omitempty"`

Reviewer 5: needs a default

    // FailureDomains is the list of failure domains or
    // availability zones in which the ControlPlaneSet should
    // balance the Control Plane Machines.
    // This will be injected into the ProviderSpec in the
    // appropriate location for the particular provider.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength:=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     FailureDomains []string `json:"failureDomains"`

Reviewer 5: can this mean that users put regions here? Looks like it encourages that. Cross-region etcd is not supported.

    // Label selector for Machines. Existing Machines selected by this
    // selector will be the ones affected by this ControlPlaneSet.
    // It must match the template's labels.
    // This field is considered immutable after creation of the resource.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    Selector metav1.LabelSelector `json:"selector"`

    // Template describes the Control Plane Machines that will be created
    // by this ControlPlaneSet.
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     Template ControlPlaneSetTemplate `json:"template"`

Reviewer 5: x-kubernetes-embedded-resource, compare https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#rawextension

    // desired replica count.
    Replicas int32 `json:"replicas"`

    // ReadyReplicas is the number of Control Plane Machines created by the
    // ControlPlaneSet controller which are ready.
    ReadyReplicas int32 `json:"readyReplicas,omitempty"`

    // UpdatedReplicas is the number of non-terminated Control Plane Machines
    // created by the ControlPlaneSet controller that have the desired
    // provider spec.
    UpdatedReplicas int32 `json:"updatedReplicas,omitempty"`

    // Conditions represents the observations of the ControlPlaneSet's current state.
    // Known .status.conditions.type are: (TODO)
    // TODO: Identify different condition types/reasons that will be needed.
    // +patchMergeKey=type
    // +patchStrategy=merge
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=type
    // +optional
    Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The ControlPlaneSet controller aims to act similarly to the Kubernetes StatefulSet controller.
It will take the desired configuration, the `ProviderSpec`, and ensure that an appropriate number of Machines exist
within the cluster which match this specification.

> It will be introduced as a new second level operator so that, if there are issues with its operation, it may report

Reviewer 5: does this mean it will have a distinct release cycle to OCP ? Is that feasible?

Due to the nature of the actions performed by this controller, we believe it is important that it have its own
`ClusterOperator` in which to report its current status.

The `ControlPlaneSet` CRD will be limited to a singleton within a standard OpenShift HA cluster, the only allowed name
will be `cluster`. This matches other high level CRD concepts such as the `Infrastructure` object.
Due to this limitation, the CRD will be cluster scoped.

The behaviour of such a controller is complex, and as such, various features of the controller and scenarios are
outlined in the details below.

#### Desired number of Machines

At present, the only source of the installed control plane size within OpenShift clusters exists within the
`cluster-config-v1` ConfigMap in the `kube-system` namespace.
This ConfigMap has been deprecated for some time and as such, should not be used for scale in new projects.

Due to this limitation, we will need to have a desired replicas field within the ControlPlaneSet controller.
As we are not planning to tackle horizontal scaling of the control plane initially, we will implement a validating
webhook to deny changes to this value once set.

> For new clusters, the installer will create (timeline TBD) the ControlPlaneSet resource and will set the value based on

Reviewer 5: I thought this should be a second-level operator. How can the installer then create a CR ?

When creating Machines, the ControlPlaneSet controller will balance the Machines across these failure domains by
injecting the desired failure domain for the new Machine into the provider spec based on the platform specific failure
domain field.

#### Ensuring Machines match the desired state

To ensure Machines are up to date with the desired configuration, the ControlPlaneSet controller will leverage a
similar pattern to the workload controllers.
It will hash the template and compare the hashed result with the spec of the Machines within the managed set.
As we expect the failure domain to vary across the managed Machines, this will need to be omitted before the hash can
be calculated.

Should any Machine not match the desired hash, it will be updated based on the chosen update strategy.

##### The RollingUpdate update strategy

The RollingUpdate strategy will be the default. It mirrors the RollingUpdate strategy familiar to users from
Deployments. When a change is required to be rolled out, the Machine controller will create a new Control Plane
Machine, wait for this to become ready, and then remove the old Machine. It will repeat this process until all Machines

> are up to date.

Reviewer 5: Why does this even matter? With the other enhancement about etcd machine hooks, wouldn't there are always be some kind of rolling update? Or would the machine api controller create the machine anyway and just the etcd membership would be "rolling"? Maybe reference the etcd machine hook enhancement here.

Author: I can add a reference for sure

I think the point I was trying to make is that for example, the instance size would be a rolling update as we create and delete machines to migrate over. You're right though, it isn't massively an issue, you could create 3 new machines and then delete all three old ones and etcd's protection mechanism should handle it. I think in previous discussions though we concluded it would be best to only surge a single instance if we can help it, to reduce the likelihood of etcd having issues with balancing the etcd members across zones (the zonal information is under MAPI control not etcd)

At first, we will not allow any configuration of the RollingUpdate (as you might see in a Deployment) and will pin the
surge to 1 replica. We may wish to change this later once we have more data about the stability of this operator and
the etcd protection mechanism it relies on.

We expect this strategy to be used in most applications of the ControlPlaneSet, in particular it can only not be used
in environments where capacity is very limited and a surge of any control plane capacity is unavailable.

##### The Recreate update strategy

The Recreate strategy mirrors the Recreate strategy familiar to users from Deployments.
When a change is required to be rolled out, the Machine controller will first remove a Control Plane Machine, wait for

> its removal, and then create a new Control Plane Machine.

Reviewer 5: this won't work with etcd machine hook, will it?

Reviewer 5: ack, you describe it two paragraph further down :+1:

This strategy is intended to be used only in very resource constrained environments where there is no capacity to
introduce an extra temporary Control Plane Machine (preventing the RollingUpdate strategy).

At present, when using this strategy, the updates will need manual intervention. The etcd protection design will
prevent the Control Plane Machine from being removed until a replacement for the etcd member has been introduced into
the cluster. To allow for this use case, the end user can manually remove the etcd protection (via removing the Machine
deletion hook on the deleted Machine) allowing the rollout to proceed, the etcd operator will not re-add the

> protection if the Machine is already marked for deletion.

Author: The operator will see that the Machine is not being drained (machines have a condition for this), it can report that back in its own status, machine foo isn't being drained because etcd is blocking it.

Then, when the etcd operator pre-drain hook is removed by the end user, this will go away, the drain will occur and the Machine goes away. The ControlPlaneSet will then spot the Machine has gone, and create the replacement.

This strategy introduces risk into the update of the Machines. While the old Machine is being drained/removed and the
new Machine is being provisioned, etcd quorum is at risk as a member has been removed from the cluster. In most
circumstances this would leave the cluster with just 2 etcd members.

There are a number of open questions related to this update strategy:
- Are we comfortable offering this strategy given the risks that it poses?
- What alternative can we provide to satisfy resource constrained environments if we do not implement this strategy?
- Should we teach the etcd operator to remove the protection mechanism when the ControlPlaneSet is configured with this
  strategy?

> - To minimise risk, should we allow this strategy only on certain platforms? (Eg disallow the strategy on public clouds)

Reviewer 5: an idea: allow it, even automate the whole mechanism, but let the user acknowledge it with some very clear value to set: RecreateDangerUnsupportedYouWillLoseYourDataPotentiallyDontWineDontComplain.

##### The OnDelete update strategy

The OnDelete strategy mirrors the OnDelete strategy familiar to users from StatefulSets.
When a change is required, any logic for rolling out the Machine will be paused until the ControlPlaneSet controller
observes a deleted Machine.
When a Machine is marked for deletion, it will create a new Machine based on the current spec.

> It will then proceed with the replacement as normal.

Author: A `Machine` should never be in the cluster if it isn't gone from the provider, so that's how we would know.

For resource constrained environments we have the Recreate strategy, this strategy is just for trialing new configs or slowing down the rollout by manually choosing when each control plane member is replaced

rolling the updated configuration to all Control Plane Machines.

#### Protecting etcd quorum during update operations

With the introduction of the [etcd protection enhancement](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/943), the
ControlPlaneSet does not need to observe anything etcd related during scaling operations.
In particular, it is the etcd operators responsibility to add Machine deletion hooks to prevent Control Plane Machines
from being removed until they are no longer needed.
When the ControlPlaneSet controller observes that a newly created Machine is ready, it will delete the old Control
Plane Machine signalling to the etcd operator to switch the membership of the etcd cluster between the old and new
instances.
Once the membership has been switched, the Machine deletion hook will be removed on the old Machine, allowing it to be
removed by the Machine controller in the normal way.

#### Removing/disabling the ControlPlaneSet

As some users may want to remove or disable the ControlPlaneSet, and we have no bulletproof way to prevent a user
deleting the ControlPlaneSet, a finalizer will be placed on the ControlPlaneSet to allow the controller to ensure a

> safe removal of the ControlPlaneSet, while leaving the Control Plane Machines in place.

Reviewer 5: you have an admission webhook. It can prevent deletion.

the cluster assuming the new configuration is valid. If it is invalid, the cluster will degrade as the new Machines
created by the ControlPlaneSet will fail to launch.

We have designed this operator with IPI style clusters in mind. We expect that the Machine objects within the cluster
should match the actual hosts on the infrastructure provider. In IPI clusters this is ensured by the installer.
Users may have, out of band, then modified these instances, but unfortunately we have no way to deal with this at
present. In these scenarios, when the Machines are replaced, they may not exactly match the previous iteration and
therefore may cause issues for the customer.
If a customer wishes to mitigate the chances of issues occurring, they may wish to manually control the roll out using
the OnDelete update strategy.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

Some open questions currently exist, but are called out in the Recreate Update Strategy notes.

1. How do we wish to introduce this feature into the cluster, should it be a Technical Preview in the first instance?
2. Do we want this to be an optional add-on (delivered via OLM) or do we want this to be a default operator for future

>    clusters?

Reviewer 5: Is a distinct life-cycle from MCO and etcd operator even feasible?

Productizing things via cPaaS is still super complex. Would rather like to see the development time spent into making this mechanism rock-solid than wasting it in wrongly understood modularity of the platform.

particular, this is strictly adding new functionality on top of an existing API, we do not expect it to impact the
functionality of other APIs.

#### Failure Modes

- A new Machine fails to scale up
  - In this scenario, we expect the operator to turn degraded to signal that there is an issue with the Control Plane
    Machines
  - We expect that the Machine will contain information identifying the issue with the launch request, which can be
    rectified by the user before they then delete the Machine, once deleted, the ControlPlaneSet will attempt the
    scale up again
  - This process should be familiar from dealing with existing Failed Machines
  - A MachineHealthCheck targeting ControlPlaneMachines could automatically resolve this issue
- The ControlPlaneSet webhook is not operational
  - This will prevent creation and update of ControlPlaneSets
  - We expect these operations to be very infrequent within a cluster once established, so the impact should be
    minimal
  - The failure policy will be to fail closed, as such, when the webhook is down, no update operations will succeed

>   - The Kube API server operator already detects failing webhooks and as such will identify the issue early

Reviewer 5: Add: the ControlPlaneSet is not critical for cluster operator. Everything done by the operator described here can be done manually to the machine(set) objects.

Author: Good suggestion thanks
